---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/aff/cards/contention-1/station-location-is-important-for-addressing-racial-inequality/","dgHomeLink":true,"dgPassFrontmatter":false}
---

#### Wonkabout Washington: Designing High-Speed Rail for Equity and Regulating King County Wineries

**Futurewise, 19** (Futurewise, 5-29-2019, accessed on 9-11-2022, The Urbanist, "Wonkabout Washington: Designing High-Speed Rail for Equity and Regulating King County Wineries", https://www.theurbanist.org/2019/05/28/wonkabout-washington-designing-high-speed-rail-for-equity-and-regulating-king-county-wineries/)

As The Urbanist recently reported, Washington state is moving forward with funding studies for an interstate high-speed rail line corridor between Vancouver, British Columbia and Eugene, Oregon. For the past year, Futurewise has served as the only advocacy organization on the Ultra-High Speed Rail Advisory Group, which is providing feedback and guidance to the consultant team preparing a feasibility study of the project. Our top concern as a member of the Advisory Group is ensuring a strong equity focus in decision-making, especially given that community-based organizations have not yet been invited to the Advisory Group. While equity is mentioned by group members and consultants as a concern, from our perspective, equity is not yet leading the charge in the discussion, which to date has centered on priorities like alignments, cost, and environmental impacts. But from our perspective, equity is the lens by which we must evaluate all priorities: alignments serving whom, costs borne by whom, environmental benefits received by whom? ==Station siting is a top concern for Futurewise in terms of determining equitable distribution of benefits and burdens for investments in ultra-high speed rail. Stations are a critical element of the ultra-high speed rail project as they drive ridership and will have large impacts on land use, transportation and housing in the areas in which they are constructed–issues that are largely outside the control of this project’s scope unless other state initiatives fill the gap.==A potential future station in Kelso/Longview highlights these concerns. Currently, two of the three proposed alignments and station locations show Longview/Kelso as a potential stop, which makes sense given the existing Amtrak stop in Kelso. However, Kelso has a 29% poverty rate (more than twice the state average), and the median property value is $125,000, about a third of the state average. A high-speed rail line that would allow people to live in Kelso or Longview and easily commute to Seattle has the potential to increase access to jobs and drive economic development. At the same time, absent other policy interventions, a new stop is also likely to increase sprawl, gentrification and displacement of vulnerable populations in the area. The use of a racial equity lens in the project development would help address these issues–but has the train already left the station? We hope not.